# Overview

## Executive Summary

The Center for the Cultivation of Technology (CCT) provides a
supportive and nurturing environment for free and open source projects.
We take care of organizational matters for the projects, including
contract management, office and legal setup, organizational structuring,
fundraising, progress reporting and tax filing. Additionally, CCT can
train and empower project maintainers to navigate all organizational
matters themselves, so they are able to choose to set up their own 
organization using our platform and tools should they wish to do so.

## Mission

We established a not-for-profit company in Germany specifically designed
to act as an active fiscal sponsor for Internet Freedom, Free Software
and social-change projects.

We are developing a flexible web platform, tailored to the needs of
umbrella organizations. This platform will help us manage donations and
grants, as well as payroll and reimbursement processes. The web platform
will be made available as Free Software for other organizations to use.
Templates will help replicate the legal structure in other
jurisdictions.

The Center for the Cultivation of Technology helps projects develop
operational and funding plans tailored to the specific needs and
abilities of the project members, and allow projects to easily and
transparently manage and allocate their own budgets under our umbrella.
We take care of all matters accounting, and in cooperation with the
projects provide the necessary reporting and documentation for donors.
We can assist with crowdfunding campaigns and the logistics of shipping
out merchandise.

Member projects can become part of a community where they are able to
coordinate and cooperate with related projects and initiatives,
collaborate on fundraising, and exchange knowledge around grant
applications, project development, and management.

## Why?

The vast majority of free and open source technology is developed and
maintained by small groups of technology and internet activists. Despite
a number of collaborations on the projects' side and a genuine interest
in supporting free and open source technology towards the general good
of society on the funders' side, there was no entity capable of truly
fostering both open source technology and project-funder relations on 
the scale necessary for meaningful impact.

Over the past years, we have analyzed how foundations and project
organizations in the Free Software world work, in order to create not
only one 'active' fiscal sponsor, but also collect information and resources
that are helpful to any such organization, whether it is dedicated to a
single project, a certain area (i.e, "privacy tools"), Free Software as
a whole, or even completely different (non-software) projects.

Currently, the dominant approach to supporting open source development
and other technologies and activists is through financial means.
However, in many cases, this complicates matters for small developer and
grassroots groups. In addition to their usual organizational overhead,
they also have to continually apply for funding, manage these resources,
and report on their progress. Many would much rather be able to
concentrate on their core issues, i.e. writing code, developing
hardware, and building community.

Too much energy is lost - both on the individual level and in aggregate
over all projects - when each and every software project has to come up
with, maintain and improve their own organizational structure. Weeks, if
not months, can be lost in setting up office and legal status, contract
management, progress reporting and tax filing. New projects especially
are unequipped to handle these things, or overwhelmed by what
organizational and legal nightmare their newly successful project
entails. This is exactly where many excellent ideas and projects fail - 
they become too burdensome to maintain. On a societal level, this means
we lose great tools and technologies; on a individual level this means
failure and frustration for the most dedicated developers.

## Our Solution

It is our goal to support open source and its developers as best we can - 
by helping them concentrate on their projects and what they do best.
For this, we serve both as virtual incubator and umbrella organization.

In this double function, we first identify important projects worth
pursuing and assemble around them the required components of the
development ecosystem (leading academics, software maintainers and
developers, charities, NGOs, educational organizations, etc.), provide
know-how as well as connections, advice as well as shared experience
amongst the projects.

We then, as umbrella, take organizational and other matters off our
projects' hands, by providing them with organizational support (from
planning and collaboration tools to meeting and travel arrangements),
networking help (connecting them with other projects in their field and
beyond), and especially payment, payroll management, budgeting, and
auditing.

This, we believe, will free their energy to work on their core projects,
raise productivity, and provide for more stability both in development
and in the support communities. Overall, this directly translates to a
strengthening of the overall resilience and sustainability of tech
development and activism.

## Our Services

### Manage Accounting, Employment, Contracting, Payroll 

Our web platform allows for all projects under our roof to manage and
allocate their budget as they see fit, including provisions for
sub-budgets such as contract work, travel, or equipment. Our platform
will facilitate all transactions and help us manage required paperwork
including receipts and documentation, will provide employment and
contracting templates, both for Europe and world-wide, according to the
specific needs and wishes of projects, employees, and contractors. We
manage payroll and tax reporting, and provide necessary documents
for internal and external audits. In essence, all projects are free
to allocate funds and work as they wish, and we are here to take care that
everything goes smoothly and is properly documented.

### Manage Donations, Donor Reporting, and Help with Fundraising

We support our projects' applications for funds (for example to private
foundations or for EU grants) and will also spearhead our own funding
initiatives. The donor management platform will facilitate
tax-deductible donations to all projects under our roof using various
means such as bank transfer, Paypal, or Bitcoin. We take care of
all matters accounting, and in cooperation with the projects provide the
necessary documentation for donors. This includes the processing of
larger grants, including the management of (restricted) funds, the joint
handling of deadlines and deliverables, and all necessary reporting.

Initially, the Center will be able to provide instant tax-deductibility
in Germany and within some European member states. We are confident that
by partnering with fiscal sponsors in other regions of the world, we
will be able to offer tax-deductibility in more and more regions of the
world over time.

### Provide Asset Stewardship

We are able to hold assets, e.g. trademarks, domain names, and
physical equipment, for member projects whenever they would like us to
do so. In many cases, this can help avoid licensing issues quite common
in larger projects with fluctuating contributors.

### Offer an Expert Network and Mentor Community

Our own knowledge and connections and the knowledge and connections of
our projects combine to build an expert network. We use this to provide
advice to projects, but also to help fill needs and vacancies, to
connect developers and activists with, for example, designers,
journalists and institutions. All projects will be able to call upon our
mentor community (including members of our advisory board and other
experts) with problems or questions they might have.

### Facilitate In-Person Developer Meetings / Code Retreats / Hackathons

Most open source projects are developed in a distributed fashion. With
some projects, it is quite common that developer teams have never met in
person. Despite this, the importance and effectiveness of human contact
is as strong as ever. Most successful projects have in common the fact
they regularly meet, e.g. at project-specific developer conferences,
which often see great bursts of creativity and productivity. We organize
and plan these meetings, including travel arrangements and conference
support (moderating, note-taking, etc.) We also actively seek to bring
individuals and projects under our roof together with other developers
and activists.

### Provide & arrange office space

While most projects are not housed in a specific location, where this is
the case and appropriate, we help arrange office space, ideally shared
office space with similar projects to enable communication and further
collaboration. We are already providing such a space to the community in
Berlin.

### Offer legal support

This ranges from helping with the 'spin-off' of individual projects as
their own organizations, to legally defending our projects and
affiliated interests in court.

### Take care of other organizational matters

From (virtual) phone networks to postal mail services (scanning and
encrypted delivery to the projects), we also take care of all matters
"office".

## Vision of Automation

We envision our platform as an eventually automated web-service which
will only require minimal manual tasks on part of CCT (e.g. actual
necessary paperwork handled by our certified accountant). Nearly all
processes can be automated and will thus scale with growing demand.

New projects will submit some data about their project and pick a
category. Once accepted, the project will immediately be able to use 
the full spectrum of the platform services, including receiving 
tax-deductible donations.

Project leads will be able to assign budgets for team members, manage
grants, and generate financial reports from our transaction
database. Team members can submit expense reports and request payout.
The platform will provide contract templates for freelance work and
employment, based on project and team member preference.

In our research, we identified this as a major gap; existing accounting
platforms are proprietary, expensive, and usually not equipped to handle
fiscal sponsorship and shared budget planning well.

We will not build a new system completely from scratch: We are currently 
evaluating existing components and libraries, to see which of them 
are best suited for fiscal sponsors.

## Goals and longer term effects of the project

### Project Organization, Funder Assistance, Virtuous Circle

We are confident that with our help, many projects will no longer have
to re-invent the wheel in terms of organization, finance, fundraising
and reporting. Instead, they will be able to rely on the tools and
experience we provide, thus freeing their energy for what they
originally set out to do. In addition, funders can be confident that
they will receive quality reporting via one interfacing organization
across multiple, independent projects.

We also believe that projects able to concentrate on their core work are
both more productive and more stable over longer periods of time,
because they can focus more on their products and the community that
they serve. We are thus confident we can create a virtuous circle
effect. By successfully incubating ideas and projects and releasing them
out into the world as valuable constituents of the community, this will
focus attention on CCT and attract additional high quality projects and
ideas.

### Focus Area & Re-Use of Platform

Our focus area is Europe; even so, projects and participants do not have
to be European to join. For existing projects with organizations in the
US, we can facilitate European Union grants and process tax-deductible
donations from European users. Ideally, we have a partnership with at
least one US-based organization that handles tax-deductible donations
towards our projects for United States donors.

We believe one actor cannot be sufficient or ideal for our field.
Therefore, our platform will be open source and designed for reuse, and
we will provide our templates and active guidance to set up similar
funder-independent umbrella organizations in more specific focus areas
or in other regions of the world to help strengthen the global activist
community.

## Original Roadmap

### pre-registration

-   specification of the platform (use cases, components, data flows)
-   further market research & documentation
    * survey of existing ERP systems
    * typical projects

### July 2016: Incorporation

-   registration of the Center as a legal entity

### August 2016: Manual fiscal sponsorship

-   ability to manage an initial set of third-party project grants
    (employment, contracting, reimbursements)

### January 2017: Alpha launch

-   ability to automatically process donations via bank transfer and
    Paypal
-   online submission forms for receipts/bills by team members

### Mid-2017: Beta launch

-   accounting processes are automated
-   projects from waiting list are hand-selected and invited for beta
    phase; existing member projects can invite other projects

### January 2018: Public launch

-   public signup possible
-   the platform allows to manage hundreds of small projects
-   source code all cleaned up, project documentation available

## Origin 

The concept for this project was developed and refined over four years,
based on interviews with a broad number of actors within the Internet
Freedom and larger Free Software community. We held "Umbrella sessions"
to bring actors together at numerous events like the Circumvention Tech
Summit in Berlin in 2013, the Google Summer of Code Mentors Summits in
2013 and 2014, LinuxCon Europe 2014, Chaos Communication Congress 2013
and 2014, the Circumvention Tech Festival in 2015, and many others. We
had conversations with a diverse set of players, including funders like
OpenTechFund and Ford Foundation, existing fiscal sponsors like the
Software Freedom Conservancy, SPI, Apache Foundation, KDE Foundation,
Mozilla Foundation; Internet Freedom projects like GnuPG, Tor, Tails,
QubesOS, NGOs like Tactical Tech, Article19, Digitale Gesellschaft and
researchers who investigate Open Source and economic models around it
like Nadia Eghbal and Dirk Riehle.

Members of our team are serving as management staff for existing
fiscal sponsoring organizations for projects like Tor, Tails, GNUnet 
and Privoxy. We maintain a group mailing list and contact list that 
includes a wide spectrum of key people in the field that have in the 
past years shown considerable interest in this effort. Many of these 
organizations and individuals have expressed their interest in stronger 
strategic partnerships.

## Team

**Renewable Freedom Foundation** is a non-profit foundation established
in 2012 by newspaper publisher Georg Schäff in Germany. Its focus is
capacity building in the Internet Freedom and Free Software space. As an
active grantmaker, RFF identified the lack of funder-independent
umbrella entities and services as a crucial missing piece for better and
more sustainable project growth. Renewable Freedom Foundation provides
initial financial support to bootstrap CCT.

**Stephan Urbach** is a trained and certified accountant and spent the
last years as finance officer of several associations. He was part of
Telecomix working in the field of free communication, Internet Freedom
and human rights and knows the pains of activist groups to handle
funding and spending money. In the last 15 years he was volunteering in
various local and international groups. He is an active member of the
Chaos Computer Club and likes vintage hardware older than 20 years.

**Moritz Bartl** serves as the Director of the Renewable Freedom
Foundation. Active in the Free Software and hacker community for the
past 15 years, he is a core member of the Tor project, a fellow at the
Hermes Center for Transparency, an active member of the Chaos Computer
Club in Germany, and works in close partnerships with international NGOs
in both technology and tech policy areas. He studied computer science at
TU Dresden, with a focus on privacy & anonymity, software engineering,
project management, and machine learning. His project torservers.net
brings together over 20 non-profit organizations in 14 countries, many of
which were newly created for this purpose.

**Dr. Martin Modlinger** is Director of Science and Culture at Renewable
Freedom Foundation. In this position, he seeks to connect human rights
activists and digital rights hackers with scholars, journalists, and the
general public, in order to protect and preserve civil liberties,
especially in the digital landscape. In the past, as a (cultural)
historian by trade, he has dealt with utopian and dystopian visions in
philosophy, literature, and history. Now he sees his role in translating
visions of a better world into reality. He holds a PhD in German
(History & Culture) from the University of Cambridge, and still picks up
a book from time to time.

**Matija Šuklje** serves as the General Counsel of the Center for the
Cultivation of Technology. He is a lawyer by profession and geek by heart, with
almost two decades of active involvement in the FOSS scene and heaps of
experience in both the ICT and legal NGO sector – most notably as FSFE’s Legal
Coordinator. Matija enjoys explaining difficult legal issues to technical minds
and technical details to lawyers.

## Advisory Board

**Claudio "vecna" Agosti**, Tactical Tech, Globaleaks (Germany)

**Mario Behling**, OpenTechSummit et al (Germany)

**hellekin**, Dyne.org Foundation (Netherlands)

**Allen "gunner" Gunn**, Aspiration Tech (USA)

**Matthias Kirschner**, Free Software Foundation Europe (Germany)

**Dr. Martin Krafft**, Debian developer (Germany)

**Beatrice Martini**, Aspiration Tech (Germany)

**Niels ten Oever**, Article19 (Netherlands)

**Christian Pfaab**, Bremen University (Germany)

**Simon Phipps**, Open Rights Group/Document Foundation (UK)

**Fabio Pietrosanti**, Hermes Center (Italy)

**Jonah Sheridan**, Information Ecology (USA)

**Liz Steininger**, previously Open Tech Fund (USA)

**Tiberiu-Cezar Tehnoetic**, Fundatia Ceata (Romania)

**Aaron Wolf**, Snowdrift (USA)

**Dr. Stefano Zacchiroli**, Open Source Initiative, Debian Project
Leader 2010-2013 (France)
